## Learning-Core-Java

### Introduction to Java

Java is a class-based, object-oriented programming language that is designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible. It is intended to let application developers write once, and run anywhere (WORA), meaning that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need for recompilation. Java was first released in 1995 and is widely used for developing applications for desktop, web, and mobile devices. Java is known for its simplicity, robustness, and security features, making it a popular choice for enterprise-level applications.

Java was developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems Inc in May 1995 and later acquired by Oracle Corporation. It is a simple programming language. Java makes writing, compiling, and debugging programming easy. It helps to create reusable code and modular programs. Java is a class-based, object-oriented programming language and is designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible. A general-purpose programming language made for developers to write once run anywhere that is compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java. Java applications are compiled to byte code that can run on any Java Virtual Machine. The syntax of Java is similar to C/C++.

### Key Features of Java

#### <ol> Platform Independent </ol>

     Compiler converts source code to byte code and then the JVM executes the bytecode generated by the compiler. This byte code can run on any platform be it Windows, Linux, or macOS which means if we compile a program on Windows, then we can run it on Linux and vice versa. Each operating system has a different JVM, but the output produced by all the OS is the same after the execution of the byte code. That is why we call java a platform-independent language.

#### <ol> Object-Oriented Programming </ol>

    Java is an object-oriented language, promoting the use of objects and classes. Organizing the program in the terms of a collection of objects is a way of object-oriented programming, each of which represents an instance of the class.

    The four main concepts of Object-Oriented programming are:

        <li> Abstraction </li>
        <li> Encapsulation </li>
        <li> Inheritance </li>
        <li> Polymorphism </li>

#### <ol> Simplicity </ol>

    Java’s syntax is simple and easy to learn, especially for those familiar with C or C++. It eliminates complex features like pointers and multiple inheritances, making it easier to write, debug, and maintain code.

#### <ol> Robustness </ol>

    Java language is robust which means reliable. It is developed in such a way that it puts a lot of effort into checking errors as early as possible, that is why the java compiler is able to detect even those errors that are not easy to detect by another programming language. The main features of java that make it robust are garbage collection, exception handling, and memory allocation.

#### <ol> Security </ol>

    In java, we don’t have pointers, so we cannot access out-of-bound arrays i.e it shows ArrayIndexOutOfBound Exception if we try to do so. That’s why several security flaws like stack corruption or buffer overflow are impossible to exploit in Java. Also, java programs run in an environment that is independent of the os(operating system) environment which makes java programs more secure.

#### <ol> Multithreading </ol>

    Java supports multithreading, enabling the concurrent execution of multiple parts of a program. This feature is particularly useful for applications that require high performance, such as games and real-time simulations.

#### <ol> Portability </ol>

    As we know, java code written on one machine can be run on another machine. The platform-independent feature of java in which its platform-independent bytecode can be taken to any platform for execution makes java portable. WORA(Write Once Run Anywhere) makes java application to generates a ‘.class’ file that corresponds to our applications(program) but contains code in binary format. It provides ease t architecture-neutral ease as bytecode is not dependent on any machine architecture. It is the primary reason java is used in the enterprising IT industry globally worldwide.

#### <ol> High Performance </ol>

    Java architecture is defined in such a way that it reduces overhead during the runtime and at some times java uses Just In Time (JIT) compiler where the compiler compiles code on-demand basis where it only compiles those methods that are called making applications to execute faster.
